test/README.md, before:

# End-to-End Test Environment

## Contents

```sh
.
├── README.md
├── configs                 # Configurations for test networks
└── scripts                 # Helper scripts for interacting with the network
```

## Pre-requisites

- [Kurtosis](https://docs.kurtosis.com/install): For launching test networks
- [Bun](https://bun.sh/): TypeScript runtime and package manager
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/): For container management

## QuickStart

Run:

```bash
bun i
bun cli
```

## Manual Deployment

Follow these steps to set up and interact with your test environment:

1. **Deploy a minimal test environment**

   ```bash
   bun cli
   ```

   This script will:

   1. Start a Kurtosis network with (among other things):
      - 2 x Ethereum Execution Layer clients (reth)
      - 2 x Ethereum Consensus Layer clients (lighthouse)
      - 1 x Blockscout frontend
      - 1 x Blockscout backend
   2. Send a test transaction to the network using the [send-txn.ts](./scripts/send-txn.ts) script.
   3. Deploy all DataHaven smart contracts needed for a local deployment, using the [DeployLocal.s.sol](../contracts/script/deploy/DeployLocal.s.sol) script.

   > ℹ️ NOTE
   >
   > If you want to also have the contracts verified on blockscout, you can run `bun start:e2e:verified` instead. This will do all the previous steps, but also verify the contracts on blockscout. However, note that this takes some time to complete.

2. **Explore the network**

   - Block Explorer: [http://127.0.0.1:3000](http://127.0.0.1:3000).
   - Kurtosis Dashboard: Run `kurtosis web` to access. From it you can see all the services running in the network, as well as their ports, status and logs.

## Network Management

- **Stop the test environment**

  ```bash
  bun stop:e2e
  ```

- **Stop the Kurtosis engine completely**

  ```bash
  bun stop:kurtosis-engine
  ```

## Blockscout

Can be accessed at: [http://127.0.0.1:3000](http://127.0.0.1:3000).

You can also access the backend via REST API, documented here: [http://127.0.0.1:3000/api-docs](http://127.0.0.1:3000/api-docs)

![API DOCS](../resources/swagger.png)

## Testing

### E2E Tests

> [!TIP]
> Remember to run the network with `bun cli` before running the tests.

```bash
bun test:e2e
```

> [!NOTE]
> You can increase the logging level by setting `LOG_LEVEL=debug` before running the tests.

### Wagmi Bindings Generation

To ensure contract bindings are up-to-date, run the following command after modifying smart contracts or updating ABIs:

```bash
bun generate:wagmi
```

This command generates TypeScript bindings for interacting with the deployed smart contracts using Wagmi.

## Troubleshooting

### E2E Network Launch doesn't work

#### Script halts unexpectedly

When running `bun cli` the script appears to halt after the following:

```shell
## Setting up 1 EVM.

==========================

Chain 3151908

Estimated gas price: 2.75 gwei

Estimated total gas used for script: 71556274

Estimated amount required: 0.1967797535 ETH

==========================
```

This is due to how forge streams output to stdout, but is infact still deploying contracts to the chain.
You should be able to see in blockscout the deploy script is indeed still working.

#### Errors with deploying forge scripts on kurtosis network

Try running `forge clean` to clear any spurious build artefacts, and running forge build again. Also try deploying manually to the still running kurtosis network.

#### Blockscout is empty

If you look at the browser console, if you see the following:

```browser
Content-Security-Policy: The page’s settings blocked the loading of a resource (connect-src) at http://127.0.0.1:3000/node-api/proxy/api/v2/stats because it violates the following directive: “connect-src ' ...
```

this is a result of CORS and CSP errors due to running this as a local docker network.

Make sure you are connected directly to `http://127.0.0.1:3000` (not `localhost`).

Alternatively, you can try installing a browser addon such as [anti-CORS / anti-CSP](https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/anti-cors-anti-csp/fcbmpcbjjphnaohicmhefjihollidgkp) to circumvent this problem.

#### Weird forge Errors

In the `/contracts` directory, you can try to run `forge clean` and `forge build` to see if it fixes the issue.

#### Linux: See if disabling ipV6 helps

I have found that ipV6 on Arch Linux does not play very nicely with Kurtosis networks. Disabling it completely fixed the issue for me.

#### macOS: Verify Docker networking settings

![Docker Network Settings](../resources/mac_docker.png)

If using Docker Desktop, make sure settings have permissive networking enabled.

## Further Information

- [Kurtosis](https://docs.kurtosis.com/): Used for launching a full Ethereum network
- [Zombienet](https://paritytech.github.io/zombienet/): Used for launching a Polkadot-SDK based network
- [Bun](https://bun.sh/): TypeScript runtime and ecosystem tooling

Commit message:

feat: :sparkles: Add automated script to update types and docs for it

test/README.md, after:

# End-to-End Test Environment

## Contents

```sh
.
├── README.md
├── configs                 # Configurations for test networks
└── scripts                 # Helper scripts for interacting with the network
```

## Pre-requisites

- [Kurtosis](https://docs.kurtosis.com/install): For launching test networks
- [Bun](https://bun.sh/): TypeScript runtime and package manager
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/): For container management

## QuickStart

Run:

```bash
bun i
bun cli
```

## Manual Deployment

Follow these steps to set up and interact with your test environment:

1. **Deploy a minimal test environment**

   ```bash
   bun cli
   ```

   This script will:

   1. Start a Kurtosis network with (among other things):
      - 2 x Ethereum Execution Layer clients (reth)
      - 2 x Ethereum Consensus Layer clients (lighthouse)
      - 1 x Blockscout frontend
      - 1 x Blockscout backend
   2. Send a test transaction to the network using the [send-txn.ts](./scripts/send-txn.ts) script.
   3. Deploy all DataHaven smart contracts needed for a local deployment, using the [DeployLocal.s.sol](../contracts/script/deploy/DeployLocal.s.sol) script.

   > ℹ️ NOTE
   >
   > If you want to also have the contracts verified on blockscout, you can run `bun start:e2e:verified` instead. This will do all the previous steps, but also verify the contracts on blockscout. However, note that this takes some time to complete.

2. **Explore the network**

   - Block Explorer: [http://127.0.0.1:3000](http://127.0.0.1:3000).
   - Kurtosis Dashboard: Run `kurtosis web` to access. From it you can see all the services running in the network, as well as their ports, status and logs.

## Network Management

- **Stop the test environment**

  ```bash
  bun stop:e2e
  ```

- **Stop the Kurtosis engine completely**

  ```bash
  bun stop:kurtosis-engine
  ```

## Blockscout

Can be accessed at: [http://127.0.0.1:3000](http://127.0.0.1:3000).

You can also access the backend via REST API, documented here: [http://127.0.0.1:3000/api-docs](http://127.0.0.1:3000/api-docs)

![API DOCS](../resources/swagger.png)

## Testing

### E2E Tests

> 🧙‍♂️ TIP
>
> Remember to run the network with `bun cli` before running the tests.

```bash
bun test:e2e
```

> ℹ️ NOTE
>
> You can increase the logging level by setting `LOG_LEVEL=debug` before running the tests.

### Wagmi Bindings Generation

To ensure contract bindings are up-to-date, run the following command after modifying smart contracts or updating ABIs:

```bash
bun generate:wagmi
```

This command generates TypeScript bindings for interacting with the deployed smart contracts using Wagmi.

## Troubleshooting

### E2E Network Launch doesn't work

#### Script halts unexpectedly

When running `bun cli` the script appears to halt after the following:

```shell
## Setting up 1 EVM.

==========================

Chain 3151908

Estimated gas price: 2.75 gwei

Estimated total gas used for script: 71556274

Estimated amount required: 0.1967797535 ETH

==========================
```

This is due to how forge streams output to stdout, but is infact still deploying contracts to the chain.
You should be able to see in blockscout the deploy script is indeed still working.

#### Errors with deploying forge scripts on kurtosis network

Try running `forge clean` to clear any spurious build artefacts, and running forge build again. Also try deploying manually to the still running kurtosis network.

#### Blockscout is empty

If you look at the browser console, if you see the following:

```browser
Content-Security-Policy: The page's settings blocked the loading of a resource (connect-src) at http://127.0.0.1:3000/node-api/proxy/api/v2/stats because it violates the following directive: "connect-src ' ...
```

this is a result of CORS and CSP errors due to running this as a local docker network.

Make sure you are connected directly to `http://127.0.0.1:3000` (not `localhost`).

Alternatively, you can try installing a browser addon such as [anti-CORS / anti-CSP](https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/anti-cors-anti-csp/fcbmpcbjjphnaohicmhefjihollidgkp) to circumvent this problem.

#### Weird forge Errors

In the `/contracts` directory, you can try to run `forge clean` and `forge build` to see if it fixes the issue.

#### Linux: See if disabling ipV6 helps

I have found that ipV6 on Arch Linux does not play very nicely with Kurtosis networks. Disabling it completely fixed the issue for me.

#### macOS: Verify Docker networking settings

![Docker Network Settings](../resources/mac_docker.png)

If using Docker Desktop, make sure settings have permissive networking enabled.

### Polkadot-API types don't match expected runtime types

If you've made changes to the runtime types, you need to re-generate the TS types for the Polkadot-API. Don't worry, this is fully automated.

From the `./test` directory run the following command:

```bash
bun generate:types
```

This script will:

1. Compile the runtime using `cargo build --release` in the `../operator` directory.
2. Re-generate the Polkadot-API types using the newly built WASM binary.

> ℹ️ NOTE
>
> The script uses the `--release` flag by default, meaning it uses the WASM binary from `./operator/target/release`. If you need to use a different build target, you may need to adjust the script or run the steps manually.

## Further Information

- [Kurtosis](https://docs.kurtosis.com/): Used for launching a full Ethereum network
- [Zombienet](https://paritytech.github.io/zombienet/): Used for launching a Polkadot-SDK based network
- [Bun](https://bun.sh/): TypeScript runtime and ecosystem tooling
